Hi, everyone.
In this tutorial, we'll learn more about the basics of SQL or SQL.
SQL is nothing but structured.
Query language. It's a language for managing and querying
relational databases. OMOP database is a relational database,
and you can use SQL to extract the data that is stored in it.
So let us go over a quick refresher on what are the different clauses that are used in SQL queries.
The first one is the SELECT clause,
which is nothing but you list
the columns that you want to retrieve. The FROM
clause where you specify the table that you want to query. WHERE clause,
which is used to filter the rules based on a certain condition.
The HAVING clause, which filters groups based on a condition
and it is often used with aggregate functions.
GROUP BY clause where you group rows sharing a property and it is often used for aggregate functions.
The ORDER BY clause, which sorts the results by one or more columns.
So this is how a query looks like
where you specify the column names in front of the SELECT query from this particular table_name where,
this particular condition is satisfied and you order by based on a certain column value or multiple column values.
The key OMOP tables are person, condition
occurrence, drug exposure,
observation, visit
occurrence and many more.
So let us see an example of what it looks like and how you can use SQL query to fetch the data that you want.
So in this query,
I'm fetching the person_id, the gender_concept_id, year_of_birth and the race_concept_id from the person table and
I have the condition that the year of birth should be greater than or equal to 1950.
So if I select this and run it,
you can see that we have got this particular result where we have the person_id, gender_concept_id,
year of birth and the race concept ID and the corresponding values.
So those of you who are not familiar with concept_id, so it is used in OMOP to reference the standardised values.
For example, gender_concept_id refers to a code for a patient's gender.
Let us look at another query to find all the patients diagnosed with a specific condition.
Example, Hypertension.
So here I have specified the columns that I want to retrieve.
Person ID condition,
concept ID and the condition start date.
I want these columns from the condition Occurrence table and I have specified that the condition_concept_ID should be 31967 which
is corresponding to hypertension.
So if I select this query and run it,
we can see that this is the person ID and the condition of hypertension started on these particular dates
and this is the condition concept ID for hypertension for all of them.
The next query we have it identifies patients prescribed a certain drug,
for example insulin.
So I have selected I want the tables person ID,
the drug concept ID,
the Drug Exposure start date and the drug type concept ID and I want all these columns which are present
in the drug exposure table.
So once I run it,
I get the corresponding query.
Now let's look at what are aggregate functions.
So we have some functions
For example, count, sum, average, minimum, maximum,
which I call these aggregate functions,
and they are aggregate across different multiple roles,
multiple rows in a table.
So if I want to count the number of anaemia diagnoses per year,
there is no particular count of the number of diagnosis in any of our tables.
So we have the query where I'm extracting the year from the condition_start_date and
I'm aliasing it as year and the Count Star,
which is counting the number of rows having this particular year has the diagnosis count.
This data is fetched from condition
occurrence table with condition
concept ID corresponding to that of anaemia.
I want to group by,
using the term
year and I want to count all the rows that have this particular year and I'll use the ORDER BY clause for
year in an ascending order.
So if I run this, I can see that in 1918 there was one diagnosis count.
In 1930 there were 13 patients,
a 13 diagnosis and so on.